CIP Draft (#396)
input-output-hk/ouroboros-leios: docs/cip/README.md

The RB chain continues to be distributed exactly as in Praos, while Leios introduces a separate header distribution mechanism for rapid EB discovery and equivocation detection.

Due to the voting overhead per EB, nodes should generally avoid announcing EBs with insufficient transaction content to justify the voting costs, as detailed in the [adaptive EB production](#adaptive-eb-production) incentive mechanism.

#### Step 2: EB Distribution

Nodes receiving the RB header discover the announced EB and fetch its content. The EB contains references to transactions. If a node does not already possess a transaction referenced in the EB, it explicitly requests that transaction from peers.

#### Step 3: Committee Validation

A voting committee of stake pools validates the EB. As depicted in Figure 4, votes are collected during the $L_\text{vote}$ period following the EB announcement. Committee members are [selected via sortition](#committee-structure) (lottery based on stake). A committee member votes for an EB only if:

  1. It has received the EB within $L_\text{vote}$ slots from its creation,

>   2. It has **not** received an equivocated RB header for this EB within $L_\text{vote}$ slots,

Author: `L_vote` is contraint to be  `> 3 \Delta_hdr` in the pp table - but I see your point to be precise here already. I'll integrate it. Thanks

<a id="cost-proportionality" href="#cost-proportionality"></a>**Cost Proportionality**: The first block after the certificate-active window expires pays a cost proportional to the **uncorrected** transactions - i.e., RB transactions since the last EB certificate. EB corrections already included during the certificate-active period reduce this cost; only the remaining transactions require an RB-side bitmap.

> [!WARNING]
> **TODO:** Add transaction confirmation levels and their implications for applications

Transactions from certified EBs are included in the ledger alongside direct RB transactions.

#### Endorser Blocks (EBs)

EBs are produced by the same stake pool that created the corresponding announcing RB and reference additional transactions to increase throughput beyond what can be included directly in the RB.

<a id="eb-structure" href="#eb-structure"></a>**EB Structure**: EBs have a simplified structure without header/body separation:

> - `transaction_references`: List of transaction references (transaction ids)

Author: Yes

The following sections distinguish between observed **network characteristics** (which depend on topology and node capabilities), **protocol characteristics** (determined by architectural design decisions), and tunable **protocol parameters** (which can be adjusted via governance).

<a id="network-characteristics" href="#network-characteristics"></a>**Network Characteristics**

These are observed properties of the network topology and node capabilities:

<div align="center">
<a name="table-1" id="table-1"></a>

| Characteristic            |       Symbol        | Units | Description                                                 |          Typical Range          | Notes                                              |
| ------------------------- | :-----------------: | :---: | ----------------------------------------------------------- | :-----------------------------: | -------------------------------------------------- |
| RB diffusion time         | $\Delta_\text{RB}$  | slot  | Observed upper bound for RB diffusion and adoption to all nodes     |            2-6 slots            | Depends on network topology and conditions         |

> | RB header diffusion time  | $\Delta_\text{hdr}$ | slot  | Observed time for RB headers to reach all nodes                 |     $\leq \Delta_\text{RB}$     | Usually faster than full block diffusion           |

Author: Mh interesting take, I've noted this remark. Let's take another look at it in our weekly.

TODO: Weekly review

> | RB header diffusion time  | $\Delta_\text{hdr}$ | slot  | Observed time for RB headers to reach all nodes                 |     $\leq \Delta_\text{RB}$     | Usually faster than full block diffusion           |

Author: Isn't it implicitly given by `L_vote` to be greater than $3\Delta_\text{hdr}$?

_Table 1: Network Characteristics_

</div>

<a id="protocol-characteristics" href="#protocol-characteristics"></a>**Protocol Characteristics**

These characteristics are determined by fundamental protocol design decisions and cannot be changed through governance:

<div align="center">
<a name="table-2" id="table-2"></a>

| Characteristic            |    Symbol     |  Units   | Description                                                            |                   Value                   | Notes                                                     |
| ------------------------- | :-----------: | :------: | ---------------------------------------------------------------------- | :---------------------------------------: | --------------------------------------------------------- |
| Minimum transaction size  | $T_\text{min}$ |  bytes   | Lower bound on transaction size          |           $\geq 55$ bytes          | Anchored to observed 55-byte transaction [^mainnet-min-tx] |

_Table 2: Protocol Characteristics_

</div>

> <a id="protocol-parameters" href="#protocol-parameters"></a>**Protocol Parameters**

Author: TODO: Weekly review

> <a id="protocol-parameters" href="#protocol-parameters"></a>**Protocol Parameters**

Author: TODO: Weekly review

> - $S_\text{EB-tx}$ limits the total size of transactions that can be referenced, controlling the actual transaction payload
> 
> For example, an EB referencing 10,000 transactions of 100 bytes each would have $S_\text{EB-tx} = 1$ MB but the EB itself would be at least 320 KB just for the transaction hashes.

<a id="bitmap-size-relationships"></a>

> [!NOTE]
> **Bitmap Size Relationships**
> 
> The maximum correction bitmap size parameter $S_\text{bitmap}$ creates a fundamental relationship between recovery period length and transaction throughput:
> - Longer recovery periods ($L_\text{recover}$) require larger bitmaps to track more potential transactions
> - Higher block production rates ($f_\text{RB}$) increase the number of blocks needing corrections
> - Smaller minimum transaction sizes ($T_\text{min}$) allow more transactions per block, requiring more correction bits
> 
> **Implicit Constraint on $L_\text{recover}$**:
> 
> The requirement that $S_\text{bitmap} < S_\text{RB}$ creates an upper bound on the recovery period:
> 

> > $$L_\text{recover} < \frac{8 \times T_\text{min}}{f_\text{RB}}$$

Author: Ah, very good remark. That is indeed the worst case. Thanks for pointing this out. I am correcting this here as well as in the PP table.

<div align="center">
<a name="figure-6" id="figure-6"></a>
<p>
  <img src="images/node-behavior-sequence.svg" alt="Node Behavior Sequence">
</p>

_Figure 6: Up- and downstream interactions of a node (simplified)_

</div>

The diagram above illustrates the Leios protocol in a simplified sequential order. In practice, these operations occur concurrently and the actual execution order depends on network conditions, timing, and node state. While many steps introduce new behaviors, several core Praos mechanisms remain unchanged.

**Chain selection** follows the longest-chain rule exactly as in Praos. EBs are treated as auxiliary data that do not affect chain validity or selection decisions. Fork choice depends solely on RB chain length, with EB certificates serving only as inclusion proofs for transaction content. This design ensures the protocol maintains liveness - the RB chain can continue growing even if some EBs fail to achieve certification, with RBs simply excluding uncertified EBs and validating transactions against the predecessor RB's ledger state.

#### Transaction Diffusion
    

> <a id="transaction-propagation" href="#transaction-propagation"></a>**Transaction Propagation**: Uses the TxSubmission mini-protocol exactly as implemented in Praos. Transactions flow from downstream to upstream nodes through diffusion, where they are validated against the current ledger state before being added to local mempools. The protocol maintains the same FIFO ordering and duplicate detection mechanisms.

Author: Once Nick has written the network part, perhaps he can take a look, otherwise I'll review this.
cc @nfrisby

<a id="transaction-retrieval" href="#transaction-retrieval"></a>**Transaction Retrieval**: Nodes check transaction availability for the EB and fetch any missing transactions from peers (steps 6a and 7a). After receiving the EB body, nodes perform fast validation (step 6b) with only lightweight verification (hash consistency, basic structure validation) to prevent DoS attacks before proceeding with transaction retrieval. Once all transactions are available, nodes can serve EBs to downstream peers (step 7). This guarantees that when a node announces an EB its downstream peers can trust it has all EB transactions available.
    
<a id="eb-transaction-validation" href="#eb-transaction-validation"></a>**Transaction Validation**: With all transactions available, nodes validate the endorsed transaction sequence against the appropriate ledger state (step 8), ensuring the transactions form a valid extension of the announcing RB and meet size constraints.
    
> [!WARNING]
> - Stop serving an EB if we determined the endorsed sequence of transactions as invalid? (Could be done without radical mini-protocol changes, but needs further analysis)

#### Voting & Certification

> <a id="VotingEB" href="#VotingEB"></a>**Voting Process**: Committee members [selected through a lottery process](#votes-and-certificates) vote on EBs as soon as vote requirements are met according to protocol (step 9). An honest node casts only one vote for the EB extending its current longest chain.

Author: cc @bwbush

**Reserve Contribution Adjustments**

<a id="reserve-contribution-adjustments" href="#reserve-contribution-adjustments"></a>During low-traffic periods when EB production is minimal, the protocol maintains current Reserve contribution patterns without artificial inflation. The adaptive production mechanism ensures that enhanced infrastructure costs are only incurred when corresponding revenue opportunities exist through increased transaction processing.

## Rationale

### How Leios addresses CPS-18 and increases throughput

The [Leios research paper][leios-paper] describes a highly concurrent protocol with three block types - Input Blocks (IBs), Endorser Blocks (EBs), and Ranking Blocks (RBs)-produced independently across decoupled, pipelined stages. This specification simplifies that design by eliminating IBs and coupling EB production with RB production, reducing complexity while preserving substantial throughput gains.

> 

Reviewer: Would be great to have summarizing statement of the idea behind Linear Leios, something like: Linear Leios introduces a voting layer over Nakamoto-style consensus for dealing with transaction surplus.

| Praos active slot coefficient                 | $f_\text{RB}$      | 0.05 /slot         | This is the current value on the Cardano mainnet.                                                                                                                                           |
| Mean committee size                           | $n$                | 600 stakepools     | Modeling of the proposed certificate scheme indicates that certificates reach their minimum size of ~8 kB at this committee size, given a realistic distribution of stake among pools.      |
| Quorum size                                   | $\tau$             | 60%                | Quorum should be enough greater than 50% that sortition fluctuations do not give a 50% adversary a temporary majority, but low enough that weak adversaries cannot thwart an honest quorum. |

_Table 6: Feasible Protocol Parameters_

</div>

> [!IMPORTANT]
>
> TODO: **@bwbush**
>
> - [ ] Determine how long the recovery period should be, entering it into the table.
> - [ ] Add a paragraph about the recovery period.
> - [ ] Are the per-transaction Plutus limits appropriate?

> Simulations on mainnet-like topologies indicate that seven slots is more than sufficient to diffuse the transactions, blocks, and votes required by Leios. Most nodes receive these in one second or less and even the tardiest nodes receive them in under two seconds. Similarly, the cryptography involved can be easily executed within the CPU budget. Seven-second voting periods provide a long safety margin for the transport and computation. A longer voting period would increase the probability that a ranking block is forged during the voting period: in such a situation, the endorser block would have to be discarded. Thus there is a tradeoff between allowing enough time for diffusion and computing but not so much time that endorser blocks are too frequently discarded. Higher-fidelity simulators, better empirical data on mainnet performance, and Leios testnet operations will can test the appropriateness of this parameter and refine its value for a final recommendation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Simulations on mainnet-like topologies indicate that seven slots is more than sufficient to diffuse the transactions, blocks, and votes required by Leios. Most nodes receive these in one second or less and even the tardiest nodes receive them in under two seconds. Similarly, the cryptography involved can be easily executed within the CPU budget. Seven-second voting periods provide a long safety margin for the transport and computation. A longer voting period would increase the probability that a ranking block is forged during the voting period: in such a situation, the endorser block would have to be discarded. Thus there is a tradeoff between allowing enough time for diffusion and computing but not so much time that endorser blocks are too frequently discarded. Higher-fidelity simulators, better empirical data on mainnet performance, and Leios testnet operations will test the appropriateness of this parameter and refine its value for a final recommendation.
```

augmenting the Treasury, and increasing SPO and delegator rewards.

<div align="center">
<a name="figure-2" id="figure-2"></a>
<p>
  <img src="images/spo-profitability.svg" alt="SPO profitability under Praos, as a function of transaction volume">
</p>

_Figure 2: SPO profitability under Praos, as a function of transaction volume_

</div>

The Leios protocol specified in this document represents a balance
between immediate scalability needs and long-term protocol evolution. The
approach prioritizes practical deployment and ecosystem compatibility while
establishing the foundation for subsequent protocol versions with higher
throughput capacity.

## Specification

Leios extends Ouroboros Praos by adding a second operating mode. The protocol switches between these two modes automatically based on network conditions and whether certificates appear in blocks. This lets the protocol keep all of Praos's security properties while processing more transactions when the network can handle it.

<div align="center">
  <a name="figure-3" id="figure-3"></a>
  <p name="dual-mode-figure">
    <img src="images/dual-mode-simplified.svg" alt="Dual-Mode Operation">
  </p>

>   <em>Figure 3: Ouroboros Leios Dual-Mode Operation</em>

Reviewer 2: Sometimes we're using `_` for figure captions, but here we use `<em>`. I'm not sure if consistency matters, but in might make later semi-automated reformatting easier.

The protocol switches between modes automatically based on certificate inclusion. When the network can handle distributing and validating larger transaction volumes, it enters High-Throughput mode. When it can't, it stays in or returns to Conservative mode.

This design ensures the protocol never performs worse than today's Cardano protocol while delivering higher throughput when network conditions allow. The mode switches happen automatically according to protocol rules (detailed in the [Mode Transition Rules](#mode-transition-rules) section) without requiring any manual coordination from stake pool operators.

### HTM Protocol Flow

<div align="center">
  <a name="figure-4" id="figure-4"></a>
  <p name="protocol-flow-figure">
    <img src="images/protocol-flow-overview.svg" alt="Leios Protocol Flow">
  </p>

  <em>Figure 4: Leios Protocol Flow</em>
</div>

The protocol operates through a five-step process that introduces new block types and validation mechanisms to achieve enhanced throughput.

#### Step 1: Block Production

> When a stake pool wins block leadership, it **simultaneously** may create two

Reviewer 2: Should we be careful about words like "may"? A more rigorous specification would define SHALL, SHOULD, MUST, MAY, etc. Not sure we need this here.

things:

1. **[Ranking Block (RB)](#ranking-blocks-rbs)**
A standard Praos block with extended header fields to optionally certify one previously announced EB and optionally announce one EB for the next subsequent RB to certify.
1. **[Endorser Block (EB)](#endorser-blocks-ebs)**
A larger block containing additional transaction references. There are no other ways to create EBs.

> As shown in Figure 4, EBs may be announced in either CM or HTM - the protocol does not require being in HTM to announce an EB. The RB chain continues to be distributed exactly as in Praos, while Leios introduces a separate header distribution mechanism for rapid EB discovery and equivocation detection.

Reviewer 2: This is the first use of "equivocation". We might want to define it nearby.

> Due to the voting overhead per EB, nodes announce an EB only when the RB is full, they do not announce empty EBs.

Reviewer 2: Requiring that the RB is full before putting anything in the EB will mean that we cannot have a higher per-transaction Plutus execution limit in EBs. Users wouldn't want to submit a tx that has too much Plutus for an RB and then wait until there is an EB that can accommodate it.

Perhaps we could define "full RB" not in terms of bytes but in terms or bytes and Plutus. That way, the RB would be considered "full" if there was a heavy Plutus tx in the mempool that wouldn't fit in the RB but would fit in the EB.

<a id="cost-proportionality" href="#cost-proportionality"></a>**Cost Proportionality**: The first CM block pays a cost proportional to the **uncorrected** HTM window—i.e., RB transactions since the last EB certificate. EB corrections already included during HTM reduce this cost; only the remaining window requires an RB-side bitmap.

> [!WARNING]
> **TODO:** Add transaction confirmation levels and their implications for applications

Transactions from certified EBs are included in the ledger alongside direct RB transactions.

#### Endorser Blocks (EBs)

EBs are produced by the same stake pool that created the corresponding announcing RB and reference additional transactions to increase throughput beyond what can be included directly in the RB.

<a id="eb-structure" href="#eb-structure"></a>**EB Structure**: EBs have a simplified structure without header/body separation:
- `transaction_references`: List of transaction references (transaction ids)
- `tx_execution_bitmap`: Bitmap tracking execution status of transactions from previous RBs

> <a id="eb-corrections" href="#eb-corrections"></a>**EB Corrections**: The `tx_execution_bitmap` field serves a critical role in maintaining ledger integrity during HTM. Following **Rule 1**, when validators create an EB certificate within $L_\text{recover}$ slots of the latest certificate, they determine the execution status of transactions in RBs within the specified range. The bitmap provides a unified encoding where each bit indicates whether a transaction was executed or not, enabling nodes to construct the complete ledger state. This bitmap is included in the EB and ensures that:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<a id="eb-corrections" href="#eb-corrections"></a>**EB Corrections**: The `tx_execution_bitmap` field serves a critical role in maintaining ledger integrity during HTM. Following **Rule 1**, when the block producer creates an EB certificate within $L_\text{recover}$ slots of the latest certificate, they determine the execution status of transactions in RBs within the specified range. The bitmap provides a unified encoding where each bit indicates whether a transaction was executed or not, enabling nodes to construct the complete ledger state. This bitmap is included in the EB and ensures that:
```

Maybe I misunderstand, but the word "validators" implieds that all SPO nodes create a certificate. That would be a waste of CPU. Only the node that is embedding the certificate in the block needs to create it. Everyone else can just validate that certificate.

This dual approach prevents linear certificate size growth by leveraging non-uniform stake distribution, enabling faster certificate diffusion while maintaining broad participation.

<a id="vote-structure" href="#vote-structure"></a>**Vote Structure**: All votes include the `endorser_block_hash` field that uniquely identifies the target EB:
- **Persistent votes**:
  - `election_id`: Identifier for the voting round
  - `persistent_voter_id`: Epoch-specific pool identifier
  - `endorser_block_hash`: Hash of the target EB
  - `vote_signature`: BLS signature
- **Non-persistent votes**:
  - `election_id`: Identifier for the voting round
  - `pool_id`: Pool identifier
  - `eligibility_signature`: BLS proof of sortition eligibility
  - `endorser_block_hash`: Hash of the target EB
  - `vote_signature`: BLS signature

<a id="certificate-validation" href="#certificate-validation"></a>**Certificate Validation**: When an RB includes an EB certificate, nodes must validate the following before accepting the block:

1. **CDDL Format Compliance**: Certificate structure matches the specification format defined in <a href="#votes-certificates-cddl">Appendix B: Votes and Certificates CDDL</a>

> 2. **Cryptographic Signatures**: All BLS signatures are validGiven the voting overhead per EB, EBs should only be announced if the base RB is full. In other words, empty EBs should not be announced in the network as they induce a non-zero cost.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. **Cryptographic Signatures**: All BLS signatures are valid. Given the voting overhead per EB, EBs should only be announced if the base RB is full. In other words, empty EBs should not be announced in the network as they induce a non-zero cost.
```

2. [Reasonable time to market](#time-to-market)
3. [Minimal downstream impact](#downstream-impact)
4. [Competitive positioning](#competitiveness)

<a name="economic-sustainability"></a>**1. Economic sustainability: Capacity without utilization risk**

On one hand, this approach avoids over-engineering massive throughput capacity without proven demand. Creating fundamental system changes to support multiple orders of magnitude more throughput adds to the cost of running a more expensive, more capable system that doesn't pay for itself until utilization increases.

On the other hand, the minimum economic requirement establishes the lower bound. As the Cardano Reserve diminishes, transaction fees must replace rewards to maintain network security and SPO profitability. Currently, the Reserve contributes more than 85% of epoch rewards, with less than 15% coming from transaction fees. By 2029, to compensate for Reserve depletion, the network requires approximately 36-50 TPS with average-sized transactions - roughly 10 times current mainnet throughput. This conservative lower bound represents the breakeven point for running the protocol sustainably.

> However, TPS isn't a good metric for defining these bounds. To properly assess economic breakeven points, we measure throughput in Transaction Bytes per second (TxB/s) rather than Transactions per second (TPS). TPS doesn't account for transaction size or computational complexity, making systems with smaller transactions appear "faster" while providing less utility. Current Cardano mainnet provides 4,500 TxB/s, while this specification targets 140,000-300,000 TxB/s (equivalent to roughly 100-200 TPS) - a 30-65x increase sufficient for economic sustainability.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, TPS is not a good metric for defining these bounds. To properly assess economic breakeven points, we measure throughput in Transaction Bytes per second (TxB/s) rather than Transactions per second (TPS). TPS doesn't account for transaction size or computational complexity, making systems with smaller transactions appear "faster" while providing less utility. Current Cardano mainnet provides 4,500 TxB/s, while this specification targets 140,000-300,000 TxB/s (equivalent to roughly 100-200 TPS) - a 30-65x increase sufficient for economic sustainability.
```

Achieving this capacity increase requires trade-offs, as detailed below.

<a name="time-to-market"></a>**2. Reasonable time to market: Complexity trade-offs**

The linearization approach eliminates complex distributed systems problems around transaction sharding, conflict resolution, and sophisticated mempool coordination that could delay deployment by years. It also maintains familiar transaction semantics, deterministic ordering, and predictable finality patterns that existing dApps and infrastructure depend on today.

<a name="downstream-impact"></a>**3. Minimal downstream impact: Ecosystem preservation**

Beyond preserving transaction behavior, the design minimizes infrastructure and operational disruption for the existing ecosystem. The proposed protocol still functions as an overlay extending Praos - just like the research paper version, allowing SPOs to upgrade progressively without coordinated migrations. 

> The most obvious approach to increasing throughput while minimizing disruption would be simply increasing Praos block sizes. However, this naive alternative would create proportionally longer propagation times that violate Praos timing assumptions and lack sufficient scalability for long-term viability.

Author: yes

<a name="competitiveness"></a>**4. Competitive positioning**

> The coupled block production design can be extended towards higher concurrency models, as demonstrated in simulation results. It maintains compatibility with more aggressive scaling approaches including full Leios variants, EB and IB (input block) decoupling, and sharding extensions, ensuring current throughput gains don't preclude 100x+ improvements when chain growth solutions mature.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The coupled block production design can be extended towards higher concurrency models, as demonstrated in simulation results. It maintains compatibility with more aggressive scaling approaches including full Leios variants, EB and IB (input block) decoupling, and sharding extensions, ensuring current throughput gains do not preclude 100x+ improvements when chain growth solutions mature.
```

Although the Praos maximum block size could be modestly raised in Leios and the active-slot coefficient adjusted slightly, there is no compelling reason to alter these. They could, however, be re-evaluated in the context of the Leios testnet.

The analysis
[Committee size and quorum requirement][committee-size-analysis]
in the first Leios Technical Report indicates that the Leios committee size
should be no smaller than 500 votes and the quorum should be at least 60% of
those votes. However, the proposed [Fait Accompli][fait-accompli-sortition][^fasort] scheme wFA<sup>LS</sup>
achieves compact certificates that do not become larger as the number of voters
increases, so larger committee sizes might be permitted for broader SPO
participation and higher security. The committee size should be large enough
that fluctuations in committee membership do not create an appreciable
probability of an adversarial quorum when the adversarial stake is just under
50%. The quorum size should be kept large enough above 50% so that those same
fluctuations do not prevent an honest quorum. Larger committees require more
network traffic, of course.

<a name="operating-costs"></a>**Operating costs**

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

> [!IMPORTANT]
>
> TODO: **@bwbush**
>
> - [ ] Revise this section and the computations to align with Linear Leios
```

their headers and embedding EB certificates and execution bitmaps in their
bodies.

1. **Header additions**:
   - `announced_eb` (optional): Hash of the EB created by this block producer
   - `certified_eb` (optional): Hash of the EB being certified by this RB

2. **Body additions**:
   - `eb_certificate` (optional): aggregated certificate proving EB availability
     & validity
   - `tx_execution_bitmap` (optional): bitmap tracking transaction execution
     status

<a id="rb-inclusion-rules" href="#rb-inclusion-rules"></a>**Inclusion Rules**:
When an RB header includes a `certified_eb` field, the corresponding body must
include a matching `eb_certificate`. Conversely, an `eb_certificate` shall only
be included when a `certified_eb` field references the EB being certified.

<a id="rb-corrections" href="#rb-corrections"></a>**RB Corrections**: Following
<a href="#correction-rule-2">**Rule 2**</a>, when the first RB is generated more
than $L$<sub>recover</sub> slots after the latest EB certificate, the
`tx_execution_bitmap` field must indicate the execution status of transactions
in RBs produced after that EB certificate was included, up to but not including

> this correcting RB. This ensures the ledger state is fully determined before

Reviewer 3: > This ensures the ledger state is fully determined before standard validation resumes.
This statement is independent of the corrections map. The ledger state is fully determined if you have all data. I'm suggesting noting here that this is only for the benefit of light nodes.

> this correcting RB. This ensures the ledger state is fully determined before

Reviewer 3: It looks like it is removed in the rendered version.

poses substantial obstacles for specific use cases that rely on the efficient
processing of large volumes of transactions, such as the distribution of tokens
via airdrops, or the rapid and consistent updating of data by decentralized
oracles or partner chains.

The semi-sequential nature of block propagation in Ouroboros Praos, where blocks
are relayed from one block producer to the next across potentially
geographically distant nodes, is a key factor contributing to these limitations.
The necessity of completing this global dissemination within the few-second
period places a fundamental constraint on the rate at which new blocks, and
consequently the transactions they contain, can be added to the blockchain. This
architectural characteristic stands in contrast to the largely untapped
potential of the network's underlying infrastructure, where the computational
and bandwidth resources of individual nodes often remain significantly
underutilized.

To transcend these inherent scaling barriers and unlock the latent capacity of
the Cardano network, a fundamental evolution of the core consensus algorithm is

> imperative. Ouroboros Leios maintains Praos' sequential transaction processing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
imperative. Ouroboros Leios maintains Praos's sequential transaction processing
```
Only classical and biblical names have singular possessives in `'` but all other words ending in `s` form possessives in `'s`. We might want to grep through the rest of the document to check these possessives, or leave them to the technical editor.

   preceding RB).
2. The certificate is valid as defined in
   [Certificate Validation](#certificate-validation).
3. At least $L_\text{equi} + L_\text{vote} + L_\text{diff}$ slots have elapsed
   since the slot of the RB that announced the EB.

where $L_\text{equi}$, $L_\text{vote}$ and $L_\text{diff}$ are
<a href="#network-characteristics-and-protocol-parameters">protocol
parameters</a> represented by a number of slots.

This **certificate inclusion delay** ensures certified EBs have sufficient time
to diffuse throughout the network before their transactions are included in the
ledger. If the next RB is produced before this minimum delay has elapsed, the EB
certificate cannot be included and the EB is discarded.

Additionally, all RBs must follow these content constraints:

1. RBs contain either an EB certificate **or** transactions directly, but
   **not** both.
2. All transactions must be valid against the complete ledger state (including
   certified EBs).
3. If a node lacks some EB data certified by the chain it is extending, it
   should issue an RB with no transactions so that the honest chain still
   definitely gains length.

#### Timing Constraints

> The timing constraints work together to maintain Praos' security assumptions

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The timing constraints work together to maintain Praos's security assumptions
```

while enabling higher throughput. These constraints prevent scenarios where
honest nodes would be forced to delay chain adoption due to missing data. The
certificate inclusion process (Steps 3-5) involves three sequential timing
phases:

<a id="equivocation-detection"></a>

> **Phase 1: Equivocation Detection ($L_\text{equi}$)**  

Reviewer 2: If these `** . . . **` are meant to be separate headings, we probably need a blank line after them.

Author: Yes, introduced them to have a nice TOC. I update the format. Thanks

scenario:

1. **$\Delta_\text{hdr}$**: Initial header propagation - the first (honest or
   adversarial) RB header reaches all honest nodes
2. **$\Delta_\text{hdr}$**: Conflicting header propagation - any equivocating
   header from the same slot reaches honest nodes
3. **$\Delta_\text{hdr}$**: Equivocation evidence propagation - proof of
   conflicting headers propagates network-wide, allowing all honest nodes to
   detect the equivocation

Therefore, $L_\text{equi} \geq 3\Delta_\text{hdr}$ to ensure reliable detection
before voting begins. This constraint is derived from the network model where
headers must propagate within $\Delta_\text{hdr}$ to maintain Praos security
assumptions.

**Security Guarantee**: By waiting $L_\text{equi}$ slots before voting begins,
the protocol ensures that if any equivocation occurred soon enough to matter,
all honest nodes will have detected it and will refuse to vote for any EB from
the equivocating issuer. This prevents adversaries from exploiting network
partitions to gain unfair advantages in the voting process, as honest nodes will
only vote for EBs where no equivocation was detected during the detection

> period.

Reviewer 2: This is fine, but I think it might differ from the original paper, where detection of equivocation just truncates the propagation of additional equivocated blocks.

specific behaviors that nodes must implement.

<div align="center">
<a name="figure-5" id="figure-5"></a>
<p>
  <img src="images/node-behavior-sequence.svg" alt="Node Behavior Sequence">
</p>

<em>Figure 5: Up- and downstream interactions of a node (simplified)</em>

</div>

The diagram above illustrates the Leios protocol in a simplified sequential
order. In practice, these operations occur concurrently and the actual execution
order depends on network conditions, timing, and node state. While many steps
introduce new behaviors, several core Praos mechanisms remain unchanged.

#### Transaction Diffusion

<a id="transaction-propagation" href="#transaction-propagation"></a>**Transaction
Propagation**: Uses the TxSubmission mini-protocol exactly as implemented in
Praos. Transactions flow from downstream to upstream nodes through diffusion,
where they are validated against the current ledger state before being added to
local mempools. The protocol maintains the same FIFO ordering and duplicate
detection mechanisms.

<a id="mempool-design" href="#mempool-design"></a>**Mempool Design**: The
mempool follows the same design as current Praos deployment with increased

> capacity to support both RB and EB production. Mempool capacity should

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
capacity to support both RB and EB production. A node's mempool capacity should
```

adopting the block (step 4). This includes cryptographic verification of
certificates and ensuring they correspond to properly announced EBs. The
complete validation procedure is detailed in
[certificate validation](#certificate-validation). The node serves RBs to
downstream peers using standard Praos block distribution mechanisms (step 5),
which are permitted to include diffusion pipelining with delayed validation.

#### EB Diffusion

Whenever an EB is announced through an RB header, nodes must fetch the EB
content promptly (step 6), such that they receive it within
$L_\text{equi} + L_\text{vote}$ and consequently enables them to vote. EBs are
fetched freshest-first to ensure timely delivery within the voting window. Only
the EB body corresponding to the first EB announcement/RB header received for a
given RB creation opportunity shall be downloaded. The EB contains references to
transactions.

<a id="eb-chain-selection" href="#eb-chain-selection"></a>**EB Propagation for
Chain Selection**: To support efficient chain selection, nodes must receive
**all EBs from competing forks**, not only those in their current preferred

> chain. This ensures that when a node switches to a different fork due to the

Reviewer 2: Should we mention that a node does not have to fetch EBs from forks that have diverged from the locallypreferred chain older than the Praos security parameter?

nodes require additional message types to:

- **Reconstruct ledger state**: EBs containing certified transactions
- **Participate in consensus**: Vote on EBs and construct certificates
- **Detect equivocation**: RB headers from competing forks

#### Praos Mini-Protocols

As described in [Node Behavior](#node-behavior), existing Praos mini-protocols
continue to operate with only minor modifications to support Leios. ChainSync
exchanges RB headers that now include optional fields for EB announcements
(`announced_eb`) and certifications (`certified_eb`). BlockFetch retrieves RB
bodies that may contain BLS aggregate certificates (`eb_certificate`) alongside
standard transactions. TxSubmission remains unchanged except for expanded
mempool capacity to support both RB and EB transaction pools.

#### Leios Mini-Protocols

Leios will introduce new mini-protocols to handle the additional message types
required for EB distribution, voting, and certificate construction.

This CIP does not specify how exactly Leios nodes exchange messages. Those
details must eventually be specified so that different node implementations can

> interoperate, but that standardization can be deferred to a follow-up CIP. The

Reviewer 2: Could the details be specified in a Cardano Blueprint document? or do we really need a follow-up CIP?

Reviewer 4: I already suggested that we should be more confident with what we propose here and that the CIP can also be updated: https://github.com/input-output-hk/ouroboros-leios/pull/513#pullrequestreview-3146008586

Ensuring implementation-independent specification is available on the `cardano-blueprint` is part of the acceptance criteria + path to active.

  than Praos does, but it simultaneously will not inherently require today's
  Cardano SPOs or users to provision additional resources, beyond some minor
  exceptions. The necessary resources already exist; Praos just can't utilize
  them all.
- **Tolerable Implementation Complexity**. The above requirements must admit an
  implementation without incurring prohibitive costs for construction and future
  maintenance.

**Discussion**

**Existing Resources**. Because Praos cannot already fully utilize the existing
Cardano infrastructure, this CIP can increase utilization without disrupting
Praos; the currently unutilized resources are sufficient for Leios. More
aggressive Leios deployments/extensions in the future will have to navigate that
trade-off, but simulations indicate that it's not already required by this CIP,
with two possible exceptions. First, nodes might require additional disk
capacity as a direct result of the increased throughput (TODO link to CPS for
archival nodes). Second, a party with significant stake might need to provision
more resources across their relays since each of the hundreds of downstream
peers is now more demanding on average.

> **Praos Independence**.To prevent Leios from accidentally depriving Praos of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Praos Independence**. To prevent Leios from accidentally depriving Praos of
```

  conservative, in case the client is already closer to a quorum than it is.
- MsgLeiosBlockRangeRequest lets syncing nodes avoid wasting resources on
  overhead due to the (hopefully) high rate of EBs per RB. BlockFetch already
  bundles its RB requests, and this message lets LeiosFetch do the same. The
  starvation detection and avoidance mechanism used by Ouroboros Genesis's
  Devoted BlockFetch variant can be easily copied for MsgLeiosBlockRangeRequest
  if Ouroboros Genesis is enabled.
- MsgLeiosBlockRangeRequest also allows the unfortunate node that suffers from a
  $\Delta_{EB}$ violation to recover, i.e. when it didn't receive a certified EB
  before receiving the RB that certifies it. The protocol design requires that
  that event is rare or at least confined to a small portion of honest stake at
  a time. But it will occasionally happen to some honest nodes, and they must be
  able to recover automatically and with minimal disruption.
- Every Leios object is associated with the slot of an EB, and so has an
  explicit age. This enables freshest-first delivery prioritization. In
  addition, objects of a certain age should no longer diffuse, or at least can

>   diffuse less aggressively. Votes are no longer relevant once they're somewhat

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  diffuse less aggressively. Votes are no longer relevant once they are somewhat
```

  older than $L_\text{vote}$, for example. EBs and their transactions could be
  restricted to MsgLeiosBlockRangeRequest once they're somewhat older than a
  reasonable value of $\Delta_{EB}$. These age restrictions ensure that the
  amount of data any honest client could request _with urgency_ is always
  bounded, and so the server's memory requirements are also bounded. Because
  equivocation detection limits the amount of Leios traffic per Praos election,
  and Praos elections have a stochastically low arrival rate, this memory bound
  is low enough to admit existing Cardano infrastructure.

The mini-protocol pair does not already address the following challenges, but

> the corresponding enrichments---if necessary---seem tractable.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the corresponding enrichments – if necessary – seem tractable.
```

  blocks, a few missing transactions, or perhaps all votes); the existing
  infrastructure would naturally interleave those with the larger and/or less
  urgent requests.

**Operational certficate issue numbers (OCINs)**. There is one last
clarification regarding feasibility that is more involved than the above
discussion. The Leios protocol requires that each server must send at most two
MsgLeiosBlockAnnouncement notifications that equivocate the same Praos election.
This would be trivial to enforce on both the client and the server, if it were
not for operational certificates (TODO link), which complicate the notion of
which sets of headers qualify as equivocating.

With the current Praos system, a SPO is free to issue an arbitrary OCIN every
time they issue an RB header, but honest SPOs will only increment their OCIN
when they need to. Whether the OCIN carried by some header is valid depends on
the chain it extends, because the Praos protocol rules along a single chain only
allow an SPO's OCIN to be incremented at most once per header issued by that
SPO.

The Leios mini-protocols, in contrast, are expected to diffuse contemporary EBs

> regardless of which chain they're on, and so cannot assume that it has seen the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
regardless of which chain they are on, and so cannot assume that it has seen the
```

predecessor header of every MsgLeiosBlockAnnouncement. It also can't simply
require that it has seen them all, because that would complicate the timing
restrictions and require tracking a potentially unbounded number of forks. Thus,
neither of the following simple extremes would be acceptable for Leios.

- If Leios ignores OCINs, then a leaked hot key would let the adversary issue
  impersonating EBs whenever the stake pool is elected until that KES period

>   expires, which can be up to 90 days later on Cardano mainnet. That's

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  expires, which can be up to 90 days later on Cardano mainnet. That is
```

  their cold key more often.)
- If Leios instead over-interprets distinct OCINs as separate elections, then
  any adversary can diffuse any number of EB announcements per actual election,
  with arbitrary OCINs. Those announcements would be an unacceptable unbounded
  burst of work for honest nodes to relay throughout the entire network, even if
  they still only relayed at most one EB body per actual election.

There is no simple compromise between those extrema. In particular, if there's
any way for the adversary to have revealed incremented OCINs to some nodes but
definitely not all, then the worst-case diffusion behavior of adversarial EBs
might be worse than that of honest EBs, which would complicate the acceptable
lower bound on $L_\text{diff}$, for example. On the other hand, if every OCIN
increment---even those disallowed by Praos---is always eventually relayed to all
nodes, then an adversary can create unbounded work by constantly incrementing
their OCINs---without the context provided by forks, there's no bound on the
OCINs the Leios mini-protocols would relay.

Thus, the diffusion of EB announcements (regardless of who issued them) is only

> tractable and robust if it's restricted to a bounded set of OCINs that all

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
tractable and robust if it is restricted to a bounded set of OCINs that all
```

honest nodes almost certainly agree on. For this reason, the Leios node should
ignore an EB announcement that is less than the OCIN on its settled ledger state
or more than one greater than that OCIN. After not ignoring two announcements
with the same election, the Leios node should ignore (including not relaying)
any subsequent announcements for that election. An intended implication of this
rule is that an honest server would send the same one or two announcements to
all of its clients; it doesn't have to track any extra state per-client.

With this rule, a client will crucially disconnect if and only if a server sends
more than two announcements with the same election. It will also ignore headers

> from leaked hot keys once the SPO increments their OCIN, but unfortunately---and
> in contrast to Praos---not immediately. The Leios node will only ignore

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
from leaked hot keys once the SPO increments their OCIN, but unfortunately – and
in contrast to Praos – not immediately. The Leios node will only ignore
```

unincremented OCINs after the increment has settled on the chain. With Ouroboros

> Peras, that could be a matter of minutes. Without Peras, it's typically 12 hr

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Peras, that could be a matter of minutes. Without Peras, it is typically 12 hours
```

under normal conditions and would take at most 36 hr before Cardano would
consider it to be a disaster scenario. Thus, if an SPO leaks their hot key, the
network would not diffuse their EBs until up to 36 hr later (usually 12 hr, and
much sooner with Ouroboros Peras). SPOs should not leak their hot keys that

> frequently, and even if they do, it's still much sooner than waiting for the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
frequently, and even if they do, it is still much sooner than waiting for the
```

> of delays** would be introduced that may affect the security of Praos (as it
> increases Δ for the relevant delivery assumption). By allowing transactions
> with potential UTXO conflicts in RBs (while maintaining all other validation
> guarantees), this threat is mitigated by enabling adoption of chains without
> having the relevant EBs.

Rather than counting all RBs toward the performance factor β (the fraction of
all blocks within an epoch that a stake pool created), the enhanced reward
calculation counts only RBs containing exclusively valid transactions. This
modification ensures that:

1. **Honest party protection**: SPOs operating with incomplete ledger state can
   always produce valid empty RBs, maintaining their performance factor even
   when lacking complete EB synchronization
2. **Invalid transaction penalty**: RBs containing any invalid transactions are
   excluded from the β calculation, directly reducing the producer's reward
   proportional to their stake
3. **Maintained incentive structure**: The existing reward mechanism remains
   intact while adding precision to performance measurement

For detailed information about the current reward formula, see the

> [Cardano documentation on pledging and rewards](https://docs.cardano.org/about-cardano/learn/pledging-rewards).

Reviewer 4: There is https://intersectmbo.github.io/formal-ledger-specifications/cardano-ledger.pdf#section.18 and https://github.com/intersectmbo/cardano-ledger/releases/latest/download/shelley-delegation.pdf

increase each month as the ledger becomes larger.

<div align="center">
<a name="table-8" id="table-8"></a>

| Throughput | Average-size transactions | Small transactions | Per-node operation |   Per-node storage | 10k-node network<br/>(first year) | 10k-node network<br/>(first year) |
| ---------: | ------------------------: | -----------------: | -----------------: | -----------------: | --------------------------------: | --------------------------------: |
| 100 TxkB/s |                   67 Tx/s |           333 Tx/s |      $112.99/month | $17.85/month/month |                            $14.6M |                       $200k/epoch |
| 150 TxkB/s |                  100 Tx/s |           500 Tx/s |      $119.51/month | $26.80/month/month |                            $15.9M |                       $218k/epoch |
| 200 TxkB/s |                  133 Tx/s |           667 Tx/s |      $128.35/month | $38.35/month/month |                            $17.7M |                       $242k/epoch |
| 250 TxkB/s |                  167 Tx/s |           833 Tx/s |      $133.07/month | $44.61/month/month |                            $18.6M |                       $255k/epoch |

> | 300 TxkB/s |                  200 Tx/s |          1000 Tx/s |      $139.18/month | $53.20/month/month |                            $19.9M |                       $272k/epoch |

Reviewer 2: Hmm, maybe we should write `/month²` instead of `/month/month`? No sure. :confused:

Author: 😅 I didn't even see that until now. I find both confusing. But I suppose your proposal make it cleaner than /month/month

- **Infrastructure**: Requires modest hardware upgrades (4-core machines) and
  cryptographic key registration, offset by enhanced rewards
- **Time to Market**: ~1-1.5 years for deployment versus 2.5-3 years for
  higher-concurrency alternatives

**Protocol Limitations:**

The specification involves operational constraints including timing dependencies
that require careful parameter tuning, confirmation complexity through multiple
transaction states, and interdependent protocol parameters requiring ongoing
optimization. These represent acceptable trade-offs for achieving substantial
throughput improvements while maintaining familiar transaction structures and
ecosystem compatibility.

**Security Considerations:**

The proposed specification maintains Praos security properties while introducing
minimal new attack vectors. New threats include equivocation by EB
producers/voters, transaction availability attacks, and denial-of-service
through invalid transactions. These are mitigated through cryptographic
validation, equivocation detection, redundant connections, and economic
disincentives. Comprehensive analysis is documented in the

> [threat model](https://github.com/input-output-hk/ouroboros-leios/blob/main/docs/threat-model.md)

Reviewer 2: Throughout this document, we should consider using permanlinks instead of ephemeral ones.

production is probabilistic - some RBs will naturally occur before there has
been sufficient time for the preceding EB to gather the necessary votes and
certification. EB inclusion is therefore opportunistic rather than guaranteed,
depending on the random timing of block production relative to the certification
process. The precise timing mechanism is detailed in the following section.

### Protocol Flow

The protocol operates through five sequential steps that span three critical
timing phases. Figure 4 visualizes the precise timing mechanism that governs
when certificates can be safely included in the chain, showing both the protocol
phases and the underlying network characteristics that inform their design.

<div align="center">
  <a name="figure-4" id="figure-4"></a>
  <p name="protocol-flow-figure">
    <img src="images/protocol-flow.svg" alt="Leios Protocol Flow">
  </p>

<em>Figure 4: Detailed timing mechanism showing the three critical phases for EB
certification</em>

</div>

#### Step 1: Block Production

Leios preserves the existing Praos chain structure while adding additional
transaction capacity through EBs. When a stake pool wins block leadership, it

> may create two entities:

Author: I've changed this from objects to components to entities and that stays now ;)

> requirement to $3\Delta_\text{hdr}$ while maintaining the same security
> guarantees against equivocation attacks.

<a id="voting-period"></a>

**Phase 2: Voting Period ($L_\text{vote}$)**

The voting period must accommodate both EB propagation and validation:

$$L_\text{vote} > \Delta_\text{EB}^{\text{H}} + \Delta_\text{cpu}$$

where $\Delta_\text{EB}^{\text{H}}$ (honest EB propagation time), and
$\Delta_\text{cpu}$ (validation time) are defined in the
[network characteristics](#network-characteristics) section.

This ensures all honest committee members can participate by having sufficient
time to:

1. Receive the EB from the network
2. Fully validate it (verify signatures, execute scripts, update state)

<a id="diffusion-period"></a>

**Phase 3: Diffusion Period ($L_\text{diff}$)**

Ensures network-wide EB availability by leveraging the assumption that data
known to >25% of the network (guaranteed by the voting threshold) propagates
fully within this period.

The critical timing constraint preserves Praos security by ensuring that all
honest parties receive and apply a certified EB before processing any RB that
contains its certificate:

> $$L_\text{equi} + L_\text{vote} + L_\text{diff} + \Delta_\text{RB'} > \Delta_\text{EB}^{\text{A}} + \Delta_\text{reapply}$$

Author: `RB'` refers to figure 4

> the EB before processing the relevant RB (and related chain), a **new source
> of delays** would be introduced that may affect the security of Praos (as it
> increases Δ for the relevant delivery assumption). By allowing transactions
> with potential UTXO conflicts in RBs (while maintaining all other validation
> guarantees), this threat is mitigated by enabling adoption of chains without
> having the relevant EBs.

Rather than counting all RBs toward the performance factor β (the fraction of
all blocks within an epoch that a stake pool created), the enhanced reward
calculation counts only RBs containing exclusively valid transactions. This
modification ensures that:

1. **Honest party protection**: SPOs operating with incomplete ledger state can
   always produce valid empty RBs, maintaining their performance factor even
   when lacking complete EB synchronization
2. **Invalid transaction penalty**: RBs containing any invalid transactions are
   excluded from the β calculation, directly reducing the producer's reward
   proportional to their stake
3. **Maintained incentive structure**: The existing reward mechanism remains

>    intact while adding precision to performance measurement

Reviewer 4: The whole incentive section up to this point is outdated (it assumes there can be invalid transactions in blocks).

   , transaction_bodies       : [* transaction_body]
   , transaction_witness_sets : [* transaction_witness_set]
   , auxiliary_data_set       : {* transaction_index => auxiliary_data}
+  , ? eb_certificate         : leios_certificate
   ]

block_header =
   [ header_body              : block_header_body
   , body_signature           : kes_signature
   ]

 block_header_body =
   [ block_number             : uint
   , slot                     : slot_no
   , prev_hash                : hash32
   , issuer_vkey              : vkey
   , vrf_vkey                 : vrf_vkey
   , vrf_result               : vrf_cert
   , block_body_size          : uint
   , block_body_hash          : hash32
+  , ? announced_eb           : hash32
+  , ? announced_eb_size      : uint32
+  , ? certified_eb           : bool
   ]
```

<a id="endorser-block-cddl" href="#endorser-block-cddl">**Endorser Block**</a>

```cddl
endorser_block =
  [ transaction_references   : [* tx_reference]
  ]

; Reference structures
tx_reference =
  [ tx_hash                  : hash32     ; Hash of complete transaction bytes
  , tx_size                  : uint16     ; Transaction size in bytes
  ]

> ```

Author: I've added references

certified EB (when a valid certificate is present). Note that EB transactions
are validated against the ledger state from the RB that announced the EB (i.e.,
the predecessor RB of the certifying RB), ensuring the predecessor RB's
transactions are relevant in both validation scenarios.

<a id="chain-selection" href="#chain-selection"></a>**Chain Selection**: Chain
selection follows the densest chain rule as in Ouroboros Genesis. EBs are
treated as auxiliary data that do not affect chain validity or selection
decisions. Fork choice depends solely on RB chain density, with EB certificates
serving only as inclusion proofs for transaction content. The
[EB propagation for chain selection](#eb-chain-selection) requirement ensures
that nodes already possess all necessary EBs from alternative forks, eliminating
additional propagation delays during fork switches.

<a id="mempool-capacity" href="#mempool-capacity"></a>**Mempool Capacity
Requirements**: The mempool must accommodate both RB and EB transaction
production. The capacity requirements are significantly increased compared to
Praos to handle the additional transaction volume expected from EB production.

> 

Author: left over

#### Epoch Boundary

<a id="persistent-voter-computation" href="#persistent-voter-computation"></a>**Persistent
Voter Computation**: Nodes must compute the set of persistent voters for each
epoch using the [Fait Accompli scheme][fait-accompli-sortition]. This
computation uses the stake distribution that becomes available at the epoch
boundary and represents a minimal computational overhead based on current
[BLS certificates benchmarks](https://github.com/input-output-hk/ouroboros-leios/blob/main/crypto-benchmarks.rs/Specification.md#benchmarks-in-rust).
Nodes complete this computation well before voting begins in the new epoch to
ensure seamless participation.

### Network

As outlined above, Leios splits transactions between RBs and EBs, with EB
inclusion dependent on committee voting and certification. **Transactions in
RBs**: EB certificate generation requires an absolute stake majority. Given that
this may not always be the case, if transactions were only included in EBs, the
protocol would risk **losing liveness** due to no EB certificate being
generated. As a remedy, RBs are allowed to directly contain transactions,

> ensuring basic liveness even when EB certification fails.

Reviewer 2: This didn't belong in the network section and is an artifact of a previous version. The requirement that RBs not be empty if an EB is produced is discussed in the section "Step 1: Block Production".

Fixed in 111355382f1ed2e9d1152a2dbdc2de0aa5e56eda.

eventually recover when it does happen.

In reality, the prioritization of Praos over Leios does not need to be perfectly
strict (and in fact could never be on hardware and software infrastructure that
is mostly commodity and partly public). The fundamental requirement is that the
network assumptions that were originally used to parametrize Praos must still be
valid — up to some tolerated error probability — when the same nodes are
simultaneously executing the Leios overlay. Concretely, the worst case delay
between an honest block producer issuing a uniquely best RB and the last honest
block producer selecting that RB (i.e., Praos's $\Delta$) must not be protracted
by Leios so much that the existing Praos parameter values (e.g., the stability
window of 36 hr) are no longer sufficient.

**Leios Correctness**: The implementation of freshest-first delivery also does
not need to be perfect. The prioritization of young over old merely needs to be
robust enough to justify the chosen values of $L_\text{vote}$ and
$L_\text{diff}$ even during a burst of withheld-but-valid messages.

**Feasbility Sketch**

The following two new mini-protocols would be feasible and tractable for a Leios

> implementation.

Reviewer 5: I changed it to:

> **Concrete Proposal and its Feasibility**
> 
> The following two new mini-protocols are proposed for the Leios implementation. This is not the only feasible solution, but this CIP should be amended as implementors refine these mini-protocols.

   style StBlockTxs color:cyan;
   style StVotes color:cyan;
   style StBlockRange color:cyan;

   StIdle -->|MsgLeiosBlockRequest| StBlock -->|MsgLeiosBlock| StIdle
   StIdle -->|MsgLeiosBlockTxsRequest| StBlockTxs -->|MsgLeiosSomeBlockTxs| StIdle
   StIdle -->|MsgLeiosVotesRequest| StVotes -->|MsgLeiosVotes| StIdle
   StIdle -->|MsgLeiosBlockRangeRequest| StBlockRange -->|MsgLeiosNextBlockAndTxsInRange| StBlockRange -->|MsgLeiosLastBlockAndTxsInRange| StIdle

   StIdle -->|MsgDone| StDone
```

<em>Figure 7: LeiosFetch mini-protocol state machine</em>

</div>

The primary messages will carry information that is directly required by the
Leios description above: headers, blocks, transactions referenced by blocks, and
votes for blocks. However, some lower-level information must also be carried by
secondary messages, eg indicating when the peer is first able to send the block.

The required exchanges between two neighboring nodes is captured by the
following Information Exchange Requirements table (IER table). For the sake of
minimizing this demonstration of feasibility, each row is a mini-protocol
message, but that correspondence in the follow-up CIP does not need to be

> one-to-one.

Reviewer 5: Thanks, missed that when I pivoted away from the previous draft.

| ←Server | MsgLeiosVotesOffer              | list of slot and vote-issuer-id pairs                        | The server can immediately deliver votes with these identifiers.                                                                                                                                                                      |
| Client→ | MsgLeiosBlockRequest            | slot and Leios hash                                          | The server must now send deliver this block.                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| ←Server | MsgLeiosBlock                   | EB block                                                     | The block from an earlier MsgLeiosBlockRequest.                                                                                                                                                                                       |

> | Client→ | MsgLeiosBlockTxsRequest         | slot, Leios hash, and map from 16-bit index to 64-bit bitmap | The server must now deliver these transactions. The given bitmap identifies which of 64 contiguous transactions are requested, and the offset of the transaction corresponding to the bitmap's first bit is 64 times the given index. |

Reviewer 5: (the aforementioned commit is now pushed)

  support for pipelined requests within the Cardano mini-protocol infrastructure
  was only concerned about latency hiding, and so does not explicitly support
  server-side request reordering. It is already achievable with the existing
  infrastructure, but only by splitting the mini-protocol's requests and
  responses into different mini-protocols, which might be prohibitively
  obfuscated.
- With server-side reordering, LeiosFetch could also be free to interleave small
  replies to vote requests with large replies to block/transaction requests.
  Without it, however, the colocation of small replies and large replies in a
  single mini-protocol with granular states incurs head-of-line blocking. That
  risks occasionally increasing some key latencies, thereby threatening
  freshest-first delivery or even motivating inflations of $L_\text{vote}$
  and/or $L_\text{diff}$. One easy mitigation would run two instances of
  LeiosFetch and reserve one for requests that are small and urgent (e.g., small
  blocks, a few missing transactions, or perhaps any vote); the existing
  infrastructure would naturally interleave those with the larger and/or less
  urgent requests.

> **Operational certficate issue numbers (OCINs)**. There is one last

Reviewer 5: I agree it's not a great fit here. It's not clear to me where exactly to relocate it.

> **Operational certficate issue numbers (OCINs)**. There is one last

Reviewer 5: I relocated this section to Node Behavior, under the Epoch Boundary subsection. (It's the new last section.)

I patched up the wording and removed one sentence so that it no longer uses terms/concepts that are introduced/focused only down here in the Network section.

with the same election, the Leios node should ignore (including not relaying)
any subsequent announcements for that election. An intended implication of this
rule is that an honest server would send the same one or two announcements to
all of its clients; it does not have to track any extra state per-client.

With this rule, a client will crucially disconnect if and only if a server sends
more than two announcements with the same election. It will also ignore headers
from leaked hot keys once the SPO increments their OCIN, but unfortunately - and
in contrast to Praos - not immediately. The Leios node will only ignore
unincremented OCINs after the increment has settled on the chain. With Ouroboros
Peras, that could be a matter of minutes. Without Peras, it is typically 12 hr
under normal conditions and would take at most 36 hr before Cardano would
consider it to be a disaster scenario. Thus, if an SPO leaks their hot key, the
network would not diffuse their EBs until up to 36 hr later (usually 12 hr, and
much sooner with Ouroboros Peras). SPOs should not leak their hot keys that
frequently, and even if they do, it is still much sooner than waiting for the
full 90 days.

> ### Incentives

Reviewer 4: I'm really struggling to understand what we are _actually proposing_ / specifying in terms incentives and what is a discussion of what could be done or should even be avoided!?

certified EBs into reward calculations. Since votes occur more frequently than
RB production, this significantly reduces reward variance for participating
SPOs.

**Vote Counting Mechanism**: The reward calculation counts valid votes cast by
SPOs on certified EBs as part of their performance assessment. This provides a
more granular and frequent measure of participation compared to RB production
alone. However, similar anti-gaming principles apply:

1. **Strategic vote exclusion risks**: While malicious parties might attempt to
   ignore votes from non-preferred parties to manipulate chain selection, such
   behavior carries significant costs
2. **Publication delay consequences**: Excluding valid votes may delay the
   release of the malicious party's own RBs, reducing their probability of main
   chain inclusion
3. **Natural counter-incentives**: The economic cost of delayed block
   publication provides a built-in mechanism against vote manipulation

This voting reward mechanism maintains the same principle as RB rewards - honest
participation is rewarded while strategic manipulation carries inherent economic

> penalties.

Reviewer 4: Does this mean we reward voting?

If yes, that would require at least a mention that EB certificates contain information who voted and we would need to factor their vote into the performance factor in detail. That is, which part of the ledger spec would need to change here (I am only aware of a `blocksMade` counter!).

Also if yes, do we think this is a good idea? On top of those "anti-gaming principles" isn't there an inherent tension between quick certification and incentivizing votes? For example, if we'd only create certificates with 75% of stake (which is enough and the best thing to do for high throughput), any vote placed but not included would lose rewards although they participated.

So my opinion is we _must not count votes_ because of this. Instead, we could consider rewarding participation in the voting committee (likelihood of being selected into it being higher than to produce a block in an epoch for small pools could satisfy small-SPO requirements). However, that is not needed for the CIP right now!

transaction fees. By 2029, to compensate for Reserve depletion, the network
requires approximately 36-50 TPS with average-sized transactions - roughly 10
times current mainnet throughput. This conservative lower bound represents the
breakeven point for running the protocol sustainably.

However, TPS is not an appropriate metric for defining these bounds. To properly
assess economic breakeven points, we measure throughput in Transaction Bytes per
second (TxB/s) rather than Transactions per second (TPS). TPS does not account
for transaction size or computational complexity, making systems with smaller
transactions appear "faster" while providing less utility. Current Cardano
mainnet provides 4,500 TxB/s, while this specification targets 140,000-300,000
TxB/s (equivalent to roughly 100-200 TPS) - a 30-65x increase sufficient for
economic sustainability.

<div align="center">
<a name="figure-8" id="figure-8"></a>
<p>
  <img src="images/leios-forecast-sqrt-fill.svg" alt="SPO profitability forecast under Leios">
</p>

<em>Figure 8: SPO profitability forecast under Leios showing clear economic
benefits once sustained throughput exceeds 50-70 TxkB/s (36-50 TPS
equivalent)</em>

</div>

> Achieving this capacity increase requires trade-offs, as detailed below.

Reviewer 4: This sentence is very lost and does not add much value alone. Would it make sense to make it part of the paragraph above the figure or just drop it?

<a name="time-to-market"></a>**2. Reasonable time to market: Complexity
trade-offs**

> The linearization approach avoids complex distributed systems problems around
> transaction sharding and sophisticated mempool coordination that could delay
> deployment by years. Critically, this linearization approach also simplifies
> conflict resolution compared to highly concurrent variants. In the proposed
> protocol, invalid transactions typically arise only in circumstances where most
> honest stake immediately recognizes them as invalid and can treat them as such
> without ambiguity. In contrast, highly concurrent variants like Input
> Block-based protocols or more generally protocol with additional decoupled block
> production create scenarios where honest nodes become helpless when conflicts
> arise between valid transactions created simultaneously by honest participants,
> requiring more sophisticated resolution mechanisms.
> 
> This simplified approach enables deterministic conflict resolution through
> transaction execution bitmaps and rolling window corrections, avoiding complex
> distributed coordination problems that could delay deployment significantly. The
> protocol also maintains familiar transaction semantics, deterministic ordering,
> and predictable finality patterns that existing dApps and infrastructure depend
> on today.

Reviewer 4: Must: update this to not mention conflict resolution and transaction execution bitmaps.

Let me resurrect some text from a previous rationale section which I believe would be fitting here:

```suggestion
The research protocol design is optimal in its usage of available network and compute resources. However, it comes at the cost of significantly increased inclusion latency and a high level of concurrency. Both of which are undesirable in a real-world deployment onto the Cardano mainnet and need to be carefully weighed against the throughput increase.

High concurrency allows for higher throughput by doing more transaction processing at the same time. In the published design and otherwise discussed variants concurrency is introduced by allowing agreement on sequences of transactions independently of the Proas block production. This is the case for when endorser blocks would be announced separately from Praos blocks or input blocks be produced on a completely separate schedule. While such protocol designs often result in higher latency due to more rounds, concurrency in itself gives rise to the dedicated problem of _conflicting transactions_.

While some level of conflicting transactions and the network/compute waste coming with it may be handled by the consensus protocol without giving adversaries an edge, perpetually storing transactions that do not execute (only one of multiple conflicting transactions can be applied), is a significant cost factor. Techniques for minimizing conflicts arising through concurrent block production like sharding, collateralization or sophisticated mempool coordination have massive impacts on the ecosystem and could delay deployment by years.

The proposed variant without concurrency and linearized processing, achieves high enough throughput without changing transaction semantics, deterministic ordering, and predictable finality patterns that existing dApps and infrastructure depend on today.
```

operational disruption for the existing ecosystem. The proposed protocol still
functions as an overlay extending Praos - like the research paper version,
allowing SPOs to upgrade progressively without coordinated migrations.

The most obvious approach to increasing throughput while minimizing disruption
would be increasing Praos block sizes. However, this naive alternative would
create proportionally longer propagation times that violate Praos timing
assumptions and lack sufficient scalability for long-term viability.
Additionally, Praos blocks larger than approximately 3 MB would pose security
risks by increasing the frequency of short forks that adversaries could exploit
to compromise the common prefix property and enable attacks such as
double-spending.

<a name="competitiveness"></a>**4. Competitive positioning**

The coupled block production design can be extended towards higher concurrency
models, as demonstrated in simulation results. It maintains compatibility with
more aggressive scaling approaches including full Leios variants, EB and IB
(input block) decoupling, and sharding extensions, ensuring current throughput

> gains do not preclude 100x+ improvements when chain growth solutions mature.

Reviewer 4: Could: mention that we also decided against them because of complexity (above)

```suggestion
gains do not preclude 100x+ improvements when chain growth solutions mature and once the ecosystem is ready to tackle the complexity coming with it.
```

<a name="optimal-tradeoffs"></a>**Conclusion**

This linearization proposal balances all four priorities. A delivered 30-65x
improvement provides substantially more value than the research paper's

> higher-concurrency variants, which would impose costs on existing dApps,
> wallets, and infrastructure while taking significantly longer to build.

Reviewer 4: Could: simplify the sentence a bit

```suggestion
higher-concurrency variants, which would impose major changes on the ecosystem and take significantly longer to build.
```

The following evidence section shall provide quantitative support for these
trade-offs and validate the protocol's performance under realistic network
conditions.

### Evidence

This section provides protocol simulation results, feasible protocol parameters
with justifications, node-level simulation results, and operating cost analysis
that support the design decisions outlined in the rationale.

> <a name="performance-metrics"></a>**Performance metrics**

Reviewer 4: Should: be able to click / link to this easily and having it in the github ToC is probably not bad either

```suggestion
#### Performance metrics
```

disk by the protocol: e.g., writing an EB of 32,768 bytes might consist of 64
I/O operations on a filesystem having a 512-byte block size. We assume that disk
caching and delayed writes smooth out the unevenness in I/O operations, so that
the mean $\bar{q}_\text{iops}$ is the best metric here.

**_Mean CPU usage:_** Computation resources consumed by the number are
quantified as $\bar{q}_\text{vcpu}$, which is the mean number of virtual CPU
cores utilized by the protocol.

**_Peak CPU usage:_** Because CPU usage varies depending upon the node's
activity, the maximum number of virtual CPU cores utilized by the protocol
during any slot, $\hat{q}_\text{vcpu}$, provides a useful indication of
computational burstiness and of how a virtual machine should be sized for Leios.

**_Adversarial stake:_** Similarly, when adversarial stake is appreciable and
active, the throughput of Leios might be drop.

$$
\eta_\text{adversary}(s) = \frac{\text{bytes of transactions reaching the ledger without adversarial activity}}{\text{bytes of transactions reaching the ledger with adversarial activity given fraction } s \text{ of the total stake}}
$$

> <a name="simulation-results"></a>**Simulation results**

Reviewer 4: Should: be able to click / link to this easily and having it in the github ToC is probably not bad either

```suggestion
#### Simulation results
```

safety and throughput of the protocol. That has been reinforced and demonstrated
by prototype simulations written in Haskell and Rust.

The simulation results use a [mainnet-like topology][mainnet-topology] that
accurately reflects the characteristics of the Cardano mainnet. This includes a
realistic distribution of stake and a representative number of stake pools. The
network is designed with a total of 10,000 nodes
[pseudo-mainnet][pseudo-mainnet] or 750 nodes [mini-mainnet][mini-mainnet],
where each block producer is connected exclusively to two dedicated relays.
Furthermore, the topology incorporates realistic latencies based on the [RIPE
Atlas][ripe-atlas] ping dataset and bandwidth that aligns with the lower end of
what is typically found in cloud data centers. The node connectivity and
geographic distribution (across various countries and autonomous systems) are
also consistent with real-world measurements. [A simulation
study][topology-comparison] has demonstrated that analysis conclusions deriving
from the `mini-mainnet` topology are also valid for the `pseudo-mainnet`
topology; the advantage of using the former is that simulations run much more

> 

Reviewer 4: Broken paragraph

```suggestion
```

| Maximum Plutus memory per endorser block      |          -          | 7000M memory units | Simulations at high transaction-validation CPU usage, but an even higher limit may be possible.                                                          |
| Maximum Plutus steps per transaction          |          -          |  100G step units   | Raise per-transaction limit by a factor of twenty relative to Praos.                                                                                     |
| Maximum Plutus memory per transaction         |          -          | 350M memory units  | Raise per-transaction limit by a factor of twenty relative to Praos.                                                                                     |
| Ranking block max size                        |    $S_\text{RB}$    |    90,112 bytes    | This is the current value on the Cardano mainnet.                                                                                                        |

> 

Reviewer 4: Should: Unbreak the table

```suggestion
```

The complete wire format showing these extensions is specified in [Appendix B.1](#b1-core-data-structures).

#### Endorser Blocks (EBs)

EBs are produced by the same stake pool that created the corresponding
announcing RB. They serve to reference additional transactions, increasing
throughput beyond what can be included directly in the RB. When an EB is
announced in an RB header via the `announced_eb` field, a voting period begins
as described in
[Voting Committee and Certificates](#voting-committee-and-certificates). Only
RBs that directly extend the announcing RB are eligible to certify the announced
EB by including a certificate.

The wire format for endorser blocks is specified in [Appendix B.1](#b1-core-data-structures).

#### Voting Committee and Certificates

The voting committee is a group of stake pools selected to validate EBs through
BLS-based vote aggregation. Only EBs that achieve the required quorum ($\tau$) of votes
are certified and eligible for inclusion in RBs.

> Votes are categorized as either **persistent** (selected for the entire epoch)

Reviewer 6: Voters?

   [ 0
   , election_id
   , persistent_voter_id
   , vote_entries
   ]

 non_persistent_vote_bundle =
   [ 1
   , election_id
   , pool_id
   , eligibility_signature
   , vote_entries
   ]

 vote_entries = {* endorser_block_hash => vote_signature}
```

<div align="center">
<a name="figure-4"></a>

_Figure 4: Votes & Certificate CDDL_

</div>
</details>

### Protocol Parameters and Network Characteristics

The following sections distinguish between tunable **protocol parameters**
(which can be adjusted via governance) and observed **network characteristics**
(which depend on topology and node capabilities).

**Network Characteristics**

These are observed properties of the network topology and node capabilities:

<div align="center">
<a name="table-1"></a>

| Characteristic            |       Symbol        | Units | Description                                                 |          Typical Range          | Notes                                              |
| ------------------------- | :-----------------: | :---: | ----------------------------------------------------------- | :-----------------------------: | -------------------------------------------------- |

> | Network diffusion time    |      $\Delta$       | slot  | Observed upper bound for message diffusion to all nodes     |            2-6 slots            | Depends on network topology and conditions         |

Reviewer 3: I suppose this \Delta is about  RBs (not all messages)

| RB header diffusion time  | $\Delta_\text{hdr}$ | slot  | Observed time for RB headers to reach nodes                 |          $\leq \Delta$          | Usually faster than full block diffusion           |

_Table 1: Network Characteristics_

</div>

**Protocol Parameters**

These parameters are configurable and subject to governance decisions,
constrained by the network characteristics above:

<div align="center">
<a name="table-2"></a>

| Parameter                     |    Symbol     |  Units   | Description                                                            |                   Constraints                   | Rationale                                                     |
| ----------------------------- | :-----------: | :------: | ---------------------------------------------------------------------- | :---------------------------------------------: | ------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | Stage length                  |      $L$      |   slot   | Duration of the voting period for endorser blocks                      | $L \geq \Delta$ and $L \geq 3\Delta_\text{hdr}$ | Must allow EB diffusion, voting, and vote propagation         |

Reviewer 3: Is there a reason you introduce a single parameter L here? I think it is a bit confusing. The two parameter approach seemed clearer to me.

per second, there is more opportunity for simultaneously reducing fees,
augmenting the Treasury, and increasing SPO and delegator rewards.

![SPO profitability under Praos, as a function of transaction volume](images/spo-profitability.svg)

## Specification

Leios extends Ouroboros Praos by enabling block producers to create an optional
second, larger block body called an [Endorser Block (EB)](#endorser-blocks-ebs)
alongside each standard
[Praos block (Ranking Block or RB)](#ranking-blocks-rbs). EBs undergo validation
by a dynamically selected committee of stake pools before inclusion in the
ledger.

### Protocol Overview

<div align="center">
<a name="figure-1"></a>
<p name="protocol-flow-figure">
  <img src="images/protocol-flow-overview.png" alt="Leios Protocol Flow">
</p>

_Figure 1: Ouroboros Leios Protocol Flow_

</div>

Leios works through a five-step process that introduces new block types and
validation mechanisms:

**Step 1: Block Production**

When a stake pool wins block leadership, they **simultaneously** create two
things:

- **Ranking Block (RB)**: A standard Praos block with extended header fields to

>   announce the second block

Reviewer 6: From the details below, it seems to be so. Could we describe it here more clearly?

> A standard Praos block with extended header fields to certify one EB and announce the second EB

- The creation slot of RB' and the end of the voting phase (RB creation timestamp + $L_\text{vote}$) differ by at least $L_\text{diff}$ slots. This ensures the EB is available to all honest nodes with good probability.

This **conditional inclusion** maintains Praos safety guarantees while achieving
higher throughput when network timing permits. When included:

- The certified EB's transactions become part of the permanent ledger
- Throughput increases significantly for that segment of the chain
- If timing is insufficient, only the standard RB is included (maintaining Praos
  baseline)

### Protocol Component Details

The protocol extends Praos with three main elements:

#### Ranking Blocks (RBs)

RBs are Praos blocks extended to support Leios by optionally announcing EBs in
their headers and embedding EB certificates in their bodies. In addition to
including transactions directly, RBs can also incorporate transactions from
certified EBs. The Leios-specific additions are: the optional `announced_eb`
field in the block header which announces a new EB by hash, the optional
`certified_eb` field in the header which references the EB being certified, and

> the optional `eb_certificate` in the block body which contains the certificate

Author: No, it's not possible. Do you want me to clarify this here?

The RB chain continues to be distributed exactly as in Praos, while Leios introduces a separate header distribution mechanism for rapid EB discovery and equivocation detection.

**Step 2: EB Distribution**

Nodes receiving the RB header discover the announced EB and fetch its content. The EB contains references to transactions. If a node does not already possess a transaction referenced in the EB, it explicitly requests that transaction from peers.

**Step 3: Committee Validation**

A **voting committee** of stake pools validates the EB within a time window
called the **stage length** ($L$):

- Committee members are selected via sortition (lottery based on stake)
- A committee member votes positively for an EB only if:
  - It has received the EB within $L_\text{vote}$ slots from its creation,
  - The EB corresponds to the EB announced in the latest block in the chain maintained by the party,
  - The transactions in the EB are a valid extension of the RB (and the corresponding chain) that announced it.
- The stage has two phases: voting period ($L_\text{vote}$) + vote diffusion period ($L_\text{diff}$)

**Step 4: Certification**

> If enough committee votes are collected such that the total stake exceeds a

Reviewer 2: Is there ambiguity in the term "total stake"? Would "total *active* stake" be more precise? Stake for retired pools should not be in the total, for instance.

| ----------------------------- | :-----------: | :------: | ---------------------------------------------------------------------- | :---------------------------------------------: | ------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Voting period length          | $L_\text{vote}$ |   slot   | Duration during which committee members can vote on endorser blocks    | $L_\text{vote} \geq 3\Delta_\text{hdr}$ | Must allow EB diffusion and equivocation detection before voting |
| Vote diffusion period length | $L_\text{diff}$ |   slot   | Duration for vote propagation after voting period ends                | $L_\text{diff} \geq \Delta_\text{hdr}$ | Must allow votes to propagate before certificate inclusion   |
| Ranking block max size        | $S_\text{RB}$ |  bytes   | Maximum size of a ranking block                                        |                $S_\text{RB} > 0$                | Limits RB size to ensure timely diffusion                     |

> | Endorser-block referenceable transaction size | $S_\text{EB}$ |  bytes   | Maximum total size of transactions that can be referenced by an endorser block |                $S_\text{EB} > 0$                | Limits total transaction payload to ensure timely diffusion within stage length |

Reviewer 4: Yes! I had the same thought

> | Endorser-block referenceable transaction size | $S_\text{EB}$ |  bytes   | Maximum total size of transactions that can be referenced by an endorser block |                $S_\text{EB} > 0$                | Limits total transaction payload to ensure timely diffusion within stage length |

Author: It sounds more like a parameter that defines an upper bound on the number of transaction references within an EB than an actual size limit on the EB, right?

**Mini-Protocol Overview**

RbHeaderRelay is a **pull-based relay protocol** that enables nodes to request and receive RB headers from peers. It implements the Relay mini-protocol pattern used in Ouroboros networks for transaction submission, extended with equivocation-aware rules to ensure all nodes can detect competing chains.

**Key Properties**:
- **Pull-based design**: Nodes request headers from peers, preventing DoS attacks
- **Freshest-first delivery**: Prioritizes recent headers over historical ones
- **Equivocation handling**: Serves at most two headers per (slot, issuer) pair
- **Cryptographic validation**: Signature and VRF verification before serving
- **Universal availability**: Headers served regardless of fork preference

##### EbRelay Mini-Protocol  

> [!Warning]
> **TODO**: Protocol specification

##### VoteRelay Mini-Protocol

> [!Warning]
> **TODO**: Protocol specification

##### EbFetch Mini-Protocol

> [!Warning]
> **TODO**: Protocol specification

##### TxFetch Mini-Protocol

> [!Warning]
> **TODO**: Protocol specification

### Incentives

> [!Warning]
>

> > This section is work in progress.

Reviewer 6: There should be an incentive for block producers to put transactions into RBs and EBs fairly. There should be a way for users to predict or choose which block their transactions is going in. One of such ways is to define different fee thresholds for RB and EB. This may need adding new protocol parameters.

Just sorting by fee isn't enough, some users may want a garantee their transaction is either put into RB or declined as soon as possible (e.g. time is crucial for DEXes, Djed).

Reviewer 6: @pagio I think this will work, thanks!

> So, I don't see how marking makes tx inclusion faster.

Marking makes receiving response faster and makes the system more responsive, so if the tx is rejected, the user can update the tx according e.g. to the new currency exchange rate, and send an updated one.

> 
> - [ ] Write this section after the details of the recommended variant of Full Leios have been settled.

### Ledger design challenges and properties

#### Leios protocol overview

To understand the ledger design challenges, it's essential first to understand the key components of the Leios protocol:

> **Five-Stage Pipeline**: The protocol operates through a structured five-stage pipeline: (1) **Propose** - IBs generated uniformly, (2) **Deliver 1** - IB diffusion using freshest-first strategy, (3) **Deliver 2** - complete IB delivery, (4) **Endorse** - EBs generated at stage start, (5) **Vote** - voting on EBs and certificate creation. This pipeline approach enables concurrent transaction processing while maintaining deterministic ordering and conflict resolution.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
**Five-Stage Pipeline**: The protocol operates through a structured five-stage pipeline:
1. **Propose** - IBs generated uniformly
2. **Deliver 1** - IB diffusion using freshest-first strategy
3. **Deliver 2** - complete IB delivery
4. **Endorse** - EBs generated at stage start
5. **Vote** - voting on EBs and certificate creation
```
I guess you are going for high info density here but the linear aspect of this pipeline is diminished when stuffed into a text paragraph.

> **Five-Stage Pipeline**: The protocol operates through a structured five-stage pipeline: (1) **Propose** - IBs generated uniformly, (2) **Deliver 1** - IB diffusion using freshest-first strategy, (3) **Deliver 2** - complete IB delivery, (4) **Endorse** - EBs generated at stage start, (5) **Vote** - voting on EBs and certificate creation. This pipeline approach enables concurrent transaction processing while maintaining deterministic ordering and conflict resolution.
> 
> **Input Blocks (IBs)**: Transaction-containing blocks produced at a uniform rate during the "Propose" stage of each [pipeline](#pipeline). IBs are generated by stake pools that win VRF-based [sortition](#sortition), with the protocol utilizing approximately one-third of available network bandwidth for IB traffic. Multiple IBs can be produced concurrently across the network.
> 
> **Endorser Blocks (EBs)**: Aggregation blocks that reference multiple IBs from the current pipeline. EBs are produced at the beginning of the "Endorse" stage by selected stake pools. An EB represents a consensus view of which IBs should be included in the permanent ledger, referencing all IBs that were delivered by specific pipeline deadlines.
> 
> **Votes and Certificates**: During the "Vote" stage, stake pools [vote](#vote) on EBs if they meet strict criteria: all referenced IBs must be available, all IBs seen by the "Deliver 1" deadline must be referenced, and all referenced IBs must validate. When enough votes are collected (achieving a [quorum](#quorum)), a [certificate](#certificate) is created and included in an RB.
> 
> **Ranking Blocks (RBs)**: The main Praos consensus chain blocks that contain at most one certificate per block, attesting to the validity of an EB. RBs anchor the Leios consensus into the established Praos security model and may also contain regular transactions.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
##### Five-Stage Pipeline
The protocol operates through a structured five-stage pipeline: (1) **Propose** - IBs generated uniformly, (2) **Deliver 1** - IB diffusion using freshest-first strategy, (3) **Deliver 2** - complete IB delivery, (4) **Endorse** - EBs generated at stage start, (5) **Vote** - voting on EBs and certificate creation. This pipeline approach enables concurrent transaction processing while maintaining deterministic ordering and conflict resolution.

##### Input Blocks (IBs)
Transaction-containing blocks produced at a uniform rate during the "Propose" stage of each [pipeline](#pipeline). IBs are generated by stake pools that win VRF-based [sortition](#sortition), with the protocol utilizing approximately one-third of available network bandwidth for IB traffic. Multiple IBs can be produced concurrently across the network.

##### Endorser Blocks (EBs)
Aggregation blocks that reference multiple IBs from the current pipeline. EBs are produced at the beginning of the "Endorse" stage by selected stake pools. An EB represents a consensus view of which IBs should be included in the permanent ledger, referencing all IBs that were delivered by specific pipeline deadlines.

##### Votes and Certificates
During the "Vote" stage, stake pools [vote](#vote) on EBs if they meet strict criteria: all referenced IBs must be available, all IBs seen by the "Deliver 1" deadline must be referenced, and all referenced IBs must validate. When enough votes are collected (achieving a [quorum](#quorum)), a [certificate](#certificate) is created and included in an RB.

##### Ranking Blocks (RBs)
The main Praos consensus chain blocks that contain at most one certificate per block, attesting to the validity of an EB. RBs anchor the Leios consensus into the established Praos security model and may also contain regular transactions.
```
The rest of the document currently has no sections for elaboration of these components.  Therefore these should have their own headers — rather than inline headings — to make these definitions deep-linkable.  I believe making this information accessible is more important than any goal of keeping this information textually dense.

the Cardano mainnet must be subject to discussion and consideration of
tradeoffs.

> [!WARNING]
>
> This is an incomplete work in progress.
>
> - [ ] Revise after the protocol definition is complete.
> - [ ] Each row should have a paragraph of justification.

| Parameter                                  | Symbol        | Units    | Description                                                                 | Feasible value | Justification                                                                                                             |
| ------------------------------------------ | ------------- | -------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------------: | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Stage length                               | $L$           | slot     |                                                                             |             10 | Short stages increase settlement speed, but the stage length must be generously larger than the propagation time for IBs. |

> | Expiration of unreferenced endorser blocks | $r_\text{EB}$ | slot     |                                                                             |                |                                                                                                                           |

Author: This table is likely out of date, as it's in the Rationale section. I've already removed it in the specification section.

      test suites.
- [ ] Audit.
- [ ] Successful operation in testnet environments.
- [ ] Community agreement on the settings for the Leios protocol parameters.

### Implementation plan

> [!NOTE] Either a plan to meet those criteria or `N/A` if not applicable.
>
> This sub-section should define the plan by which a proposal will meet its
> acceptance criteria, when applicable. More, proposals that require
> implementation work in a specific project may indicate one or more
> implementors. Implementors must sign off on the plan and be referenced in the
> document's preamble.
>
> In particular, an implementation that requires a hard-fork should explicitly
> mention it in its _'Implementation Plan'_.

- [ ] Detailed node-level (as opposed to this protocol-level) specification.
- [ ] Develop node-level conformance test suite.
- Consider developing a "quick and dirty" implementation for large scale
  experiments.
- Coordinate with related activities on other protocol enhancements.
  - Compatibility between Peras, Leios, and Genesis.
  - Common design and implementation for certificates, voting, and related key

>     registration: Mithril, Peras, Leios, and partner chains.

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/berewt/CIPs/blob/master/CIP-xxxx/CIP-xxxx.md is relevant for key registration.

- Delaying diffusion of IBs, EBs, or votes
- Submitting invalid, conflicting, or duplicate transactions

Nearly all of these _hypothetical_ threats are already mitigated by the protocol
design, the incentive structure, or the cost of the resources needed to execute
the threat. The [Threat model][threat-model] section of the first Leios
Technical report contains a detailed taxonomy that we summarize here. The
general impact of such attacks varies:

- Resource burden on nodes
- Lowered throughput
- Increased transaction delay
- Manipulation of dapps or oracles

_Grinding and other threats to Praos:_ Threats to the ranking blocks used by
Leios are already mitigated by Ouroboros Praos and Genesis. Nevertheless, the

> possibility of _grinding attacks_, as discussed in [CPS-0017][cps-17], will

Reviewer 8: We have a  corresponding CIP number (c.f. [repo](https://github.com/cardano-foundation/CIPs/pull/1065) ) but the PR has not beed merged yet if that is useful.

of network egress and storage of the ledger.

![SPO profitability under Leios.](images/leios-forecast-sqrt-fill.svg)

<em>Figure 17: SPO profitability under Leios</em>

<a id="intensive-plutus-execution" href="#intensive-plutus-execution">**Intensive
Plutus execution**</a>

Because there typically is a time window of several seconds from the time a
Leios endorser block can be created to when voting must complete, there is also
an opportunity to do more computation validating transactions within an endorser
block than for a Praos ranking block. This opens the possibility of increasing
the Plutus execution budget for endorser blocks so that it is significantly
larger than the budget for Praos blocks. At the very least a script could be
allowed to use the whole Plutus execution budget for an endorser block, instead
of just one quarter of it as is the case for Praos.

Numerous emerging use cases on Cardano would benefit from larger Plutus
execution budgets. Complex dapps currently have to split a single logical
operation into a sequence of several transactions, increasing the development
effort, the complexity, and the attack surface of the scripts involved.

> - _ZK proofs:_ It may be possible to increase the Plutus execution budget enough

Reviewer 8: IIRC, it took several scripts indeed to verify a zk-proof of a pairing check onchain (RSNARK team project). Adam should be the best person to contact to know how to do this and more importantly if there is any plan to facilitate this.

  that a complete ZK proof could verified in a single transaction.
- _Large number of parties:_ Scripts managing potential interactions with a
  large number of parties (e.g., airdrops, lotteries, and local accounts) are
  intrinsically limited by Plutus execution limits.
- _On-chain interpreters:_ Dapps like Marlowe run interpreters for their DSL in
  a Plutus script. Execution limits currently restrict the complexity of the DSL
  expressions that can be evaluated in a single transaction.

<a id="novel-user-cases" href="#novel-user-cases">**Novel use cases**</a>

Although the version of Leios proposed in this document does not support the
particular use cases listed below, a minor variant or future version of Leios
could.

- _Priority pipelines:_ Different Leios pipelines might have different stage
  lengths, throughput, fees, and/or Plutus execution limits, enabling
  applications to select their level of service.
- _Externally batched endorser blocks:_ Third parties could construct endorser
  blocks and provide them directly to the block producers, allowing a dapp or an
  exchange detailed control over sequencing of interdependent transactions
  within the endorser block.

> - _Nuanced roles for SPOs:_ Leios opens the possibility of separating the

Reviewer 8: Technically, you could already achieve this by adding a tag in the lottery check (the sortition paper already mentions this). You could hence say that the primitives can support in the future such functionality but this has not been considered at the moment.

<!-- License -->

[apache-2.0]: http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0 "Apache License 2.0"

<!-- Footnotes -->

[^fasort]: The Fait Accompli sortition scheme

[^2]: Leios: Dynamic Availability for Blockchain Sharding (2025)

[^leioscrypto]: Leios cryptography prototype implementation

## Appendix

<h3 id="appendix-a-requirements">Appendix A: Requirements for votes and certificates</h2>

The voting and certificate scheme for Leios must satisfy the following
requirements to ensure security, efficiency, and practical deployability:

1. **Succinct registration of keys:** The registration of voting keys should not
   involve excessive data transfer or coordination between parties. Ideally,
   such registration would occur as part of the already existing operational
   certificates and not unduly increase their size.

2. **Key rotation:** The cryptographic keys used to sign Leios votes and
   certificates _do not_ need to be rotated periodically because the constraints
   on Leios voting rounds and the key rotation already present in Praos secure
   the protocol against attacks such as replay and key compromise.

> 3. **Deterministic signatures:** Deterministic signatures can guard against

Reviewer 8: Deterministic signature are indeed less risky (for instance you do not need to worry about low entropy randomness) but are not strictly required. 
We only need deterministic random value for the lottery, and you are using VRFs for this matter.

   attacks that weaken key security.

> 4. **Local sortition:** Selection of the voting committee should not be so

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
4. **Local lottery:** Selection of the voting committee should not be so
```

   an EB.

6. **Soundness:** Adversaries with near majority stake (e.g., 49%) should not be
   able to form an adversarial quorum that certifies the EB of their choice.

7. **Small votes:** Because vote traffic is large and frequent in Leios, the
   votes themselves should be small. Note that the large size of Praos KES
   signatures precludes their use for signing Leios votes.

8. **Small certificates:** Because Leios certificates are frequent and must fit
   inside Praos blocks, they should be small enough so there is plenty of room
   for other transactions in the Praos blocks. Note once again that certificates
   based on Praos KES signatures are too large for consideration in Leios.

9. **Fast cryptography:** The computational burden of creating and verifying
   voting eligibility, the votes themselves, and the resulting certificate must
   be small enough to fit within the CPU budget for Leios stages.

The aggregate signature scheme implementation specified in this document (using
BLS as an example) satisfies all these requirements, as evidenced by the
performance characteristics and certificate sizes documented in the

> [Specification for votes and certificates](#specification-for-votes-and-certificates)

Reviewer 8: I think this link is dead as the corresponding section was removed and moved to a different folder/file.
